Finally, let's talk about regulatory stakeholders.
The main regulatory stakeholder in
the medical imaging world is the Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA.
Note that in Europe, the equivalent to FDA approval is to get something called a CE mark,
which many US companies also pursue as there tend to be more lenient guidelines.
We will not be talking about CE marking in this course.
There will also be a lot that we can't cover in this course about the FDA process,
but by the end of this course in your project,
you will have a good grasp on the components that are most relevant
to the data scientist who develops the AI algorithms.
The main concern from the FDA is patient safety
and protecting patients from all unnecessary risks.
The FDA also ensures that the algorithm is labeled
and marketed and used appropriately in clinical settings.
Labeling is something that we will cover in much more depth in Lesson 4,
but it is tied to how you define your algorithms intended use and informs
your end users of what your algorithm is designed to do in very simple terms.
For example, an algorithm that's labeled to be used for the detection of
bone fractures on X-ray should not be used on a CT image.
The FDA treats AI for 2D medical imaging just like medical devices,
this means that they use the guidelines for assessing
medical devices to also assess AI algorithms.
Medical devices are broken down into three classes by the FDA: Class I, II, and III.
Devices fall into one of these three classes based on the potential risk that they
present to the patient and whether it is low, medium, or high.
Hospital beds have a low risk to patients,
so they are classified as a Class I medical device by the FDA.
Medical equipment such as a blood pressure cuff and
absorbable sutures may have some potential risks to patients,
but they're not so high.
So they are classified as Class II.
Implantable pacemakers and coronary stents can cause
huge damage to a patient's body if they are not used correctly or by a trained expert.
So they are listed as an FDA Class III medical device.
A device or algorithms class dictates the safety controls that
the device manufacturer or
algorithm developer must put into place in bringing their product to market.
Safety controls mean the measures that the manufacturer puts
into place to try to mitigate as much risk as possible.
Class I devices only require general controls.
This means that putting enough plain English guidelines and special labeling on
your medical device is sufficient for
the FDA to mitigate risks associated with the device.
Class II devices require both general controls and special controls,
which means that more risk mitigation steps need to be
taken than just including special labeling to be considered safe.
In addition to general controls and special controls,
devices with the highest risk require premarket authorization from the FDA.
The risk categories and safety controls in turn dictate
which regulatory pathway the devices or algorithm must go down.
The two main regulatory pathways for medical devices are 510(k) and premarket approval,
also known as PMA.
510(k) is the regulatory pathway for low and medium-risk devices.
Medical device manufacturers and
algorithm developers need to show the FDA evidence that their device
is substantially equivalent to a predicate device
that has already been approved for marketing by the FDA.
With 510(k), human testing is not required as part of the regulatory pathway.
Once all documentation is compiled and submitted to the FDA,
510(k) submissions take only 30-90 days to be approved or rejected by the FDA.
Higher-risk devices and algorithms must go through
a more rigorous process called premarket approval.
PMA is used to prove that a new device is safe and effective for the end user.
As a result, this process is much more in depth than the
510(k) process and typically requires clinical trials.
It also takes a lot longer for the FDA to approve or reject to the application.
To summarize the FDA regulatory process,
medical devices fall into
three FDA classes based on the potential risk that they present to the patient.
Lower risk devices fall into Classes I and II and usually
self-regulate or take a 510(k) submission pathway.
If a device is exempt,
it means it's registered with the FDA,
but the FDA is not continuously monitoring it for safety.
High-risk devices can take the 510(k) pathway,
but they usually require the premarket approval process.